CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

Thank you for your interest in contributing to Apalache!

Apalache is a symbolic model checker for [TLA+][].

<!-- TODO(shonfeder): Add code of conduct -->

The easiest
way to contribute is to [open a new issue][] to report a bug or a feature
request. If you want to contribute to the code base, [searching for "help
wanted"][help-wanted] is a good place to start. If you would like to begin
working on an existing issue, please indicate so by leaving a comment. If you'd
like to work on something else, open an issue to start the discussion.

The rest of this document outlines the best practices for contributing to
Apalache:

[TLA+]: https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tla.html
[help-wanted]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22help+wanted%22
[open a new issue]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/issues/new/choose

<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-refresh-toc -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Contributing](#contributing)
    - [Decision Making](#decision-making)
    - [Making a pull request](#making-a-pull-request)
    - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
        - [Environment](#environment)
    - [Development Environment](#development-environment)
        - [Emacs](#emacs)
            - [Install `metals-emacs`](#install-metals-emacs)
                - [Arch](#arch)
            - [Doom Emacs](#doom-emacs)
            - [Vanilla Emacs](#vanilla-emacs)
    - [Testing](#testing)
        - [Unit tests](#unit-tests)
        - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
        - [Continuous Integration](#continuous-integration)
    - [Changelog](#changelog)
    - [Releases](#releases)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

## Decision Making

<!-- TODO(QUESTION): Do we want this much overhead to contributions? -->

When contributing to the project, the following process leads to the best chance
of landing changes:

1. All work on the code base should be motivated by a [Github Issue][]. The
   issue helps capture the problem we're trying to solve and allows for early
   feedback.
2. Once the issue is created, maintainers may request more detailed
   documentation in the form of a [Request for Comment (RFC)][rfc] or
   [Architectural Decision Record (ADR)][adr].
3. Discussion at the RFC stage will build collective understanding of the
   dimensions of the problem and help structure conversations around trade-offs.
4. When the problem is well understood but the solution leads to large
   structural changes to the code base, these changes should be proposed in the
   form of an ADR. The ADR will help build consensus on an overall strategy to
   ensure the code base maintains coherence in the larger context. If you are
   not comfortable with writing an ADR, you can open a less-formal issue and the
   maintainers will help you turn it into an ADR.
5. When the problem and proposed solution are well understood, implementation
   can begin by opening a [pull request](#making-a-pull-request).

## Making a pull request

We develop on the `unstable` branch and release stable code on `master`.

Nontrivial changes should start with a [draft pull request][] against
`unstable`. The draft signals that work is underway. When the work is ready for
feedback, hitting "Ready for Review" will signal to the maintainers that you are
ready for them to take a look.

Where possible, implementation trajectories should aim to proceed as a series of
small, logically distinct, incremental changes, in the form of small PRs that
can be merged quickly. This helps manage the load for reviewers and reduces the
likelihood that PRs will sit open for longer.

Each stage of the process is aimed at creating feedback cycles which align
contributors and maintainers to make sure:

- Contributors don’t waste their time implementing/proposing features which
  won’t land in `main`.
- Maintainers have the necessary context in order to support and review
  contributions.

## Dependencies

For setting up the local build, see the [instructions on building form
source](./docs/manual.md#building-from-source).

### Environment

The necessary shell environment is specified in [.envrc](./.envrc). You can:

- use [direnv][] to load the environment automatically
- source this file manually from your shell
- or use it as a reference for what to put in your preferred rc files

[direnv]: https://direnv.net/

## Development Environment

If you use a different development environment or editor set up, please document
it here!

### Emacs

You can use the [metals][] Scala language server together with [lsp-mode][] for
a nice IDE experience in the world's best lisp driven operating system.

#### Install `metals-emacs`

##### Arch

Using yay to install from AUR:

```sh
yay -Syu metals
```

#### Doom Emacs

[Doom Emacs][doom-emacs] streamlines configuration and installation:

Edit your [~/.doom.d/init.el](~/.doom.d/init.el), to uncomment `scala` and
configure it use lsp:

```elisp
       (scala              ; java, but good
        +lsp)
```

Run `doom sync` and restart. That's it.

If you hit any snags, you might also consult [this
writeup][writeup]

[doom-emacs]: https://github.com/hlissner/doom-emacs
[metals]: https://scalameta.org/metals/
[lsp-mode]: https://github.com/emacs-lsp/lsp-mode
[writeup]: https://siawyoung.com/blog/code/2020-02-06-installing-metals-emacs-doom

#### Vanilla Emacs

For installation and configuration in vanilla emacs, see
https://scalameta.org/metals/docs/editors/emacs.html

## Testing

### Unit tests

Run the units

```sh
make test
```

### Integration tests

Run the integration tests with

```sh
make integration
```

### Continuous Integration

We run continuous integration tests on the `master` and `unstable` branches via
[Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/github/informalsystems/apalache). The CI configuration
is located in [.travis.yml](./.travis.yml).

## Changelog

Every non-trivial PR must update the [change log](./CHANGES.md).

Changes for a given release should be split between the four sections: Breaking
Changes, Features, Improvements, Bug Fixes.

## Releases

Assuming the version to be released is `l.m.n`, as per semantic versioning, the
current release process is as follows:

- [ ] Update [CHANGES.md](./CHANGES.md), adding the heading `## l.m.n` over the
      unreleased changes.
- [ ] Copy this section into a new file named `./script/release-l.m.n.txt`
- [ ] Open a PR to merge `unstable` into `master`, titling it `Release l.m.n`
- [ ] When the PR is merged, checkout `master` and then run `./script/release
      vl.m.n ./scripts/release-l.m.n.txt`
- [ ] Build an updated docker container `docker build -t apalache/mv:l.m.n`
- [ ] Push the new taged image to dockerhub `docker push apalache/mc:l.m.n`
- [ ] Post a notification to the (internal) `#releases` slack channel.

[Github Issue]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/issues
[rfc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Request_for_Comments
[adr]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Architectural_decision
[draft pull request]: https://github.blog/2019-02-14-introducing-draft-pull-requests/

Commit message:

Update CONTRIBUTING.md (#202)
Added a note on IntelliJ IDEA and version bumping

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

Thank you for your interest in contributing to Apalache!

Apalache is a symbolic model checker for [TLA+][].

<!-- TODO(shonfeder): Add code of conduct -->

The easiest
way to contribute is to [open a new issue][] to report a bug or a feature
request. If you want to contribute to the code base, [searching for "help
wanted"][help-wanted] is a good place to start. If you would like to begin
working on an existing issue, please indicate so by leaving a comment. If you'd
like to work on something else, open an issue to start the discussion.

The rest of this document outlines the best practices for contributing to
Apalache:

[TLA+]: https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tla.html
[help-wanted]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22help+wanted%22
[open a new issue]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/issues/new/choose

<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-refresh-toc -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Contributing](#contributing)
    - [Decision Making](#decision-making)
    - [Making a pull request](#making-a-pull-request)
    - [Dependencies](#dependencies)
        - [Environment](#environment)
    - [Development Environment](#development-environment)
        - [Emacs](#emacs)
            - [Install `metals-emacs`](#install-metals-emacs)
                - [Arch](#arch)
            - [Doom Emacs](#doom-emacs)
            - [Vanilla Emacs](#vanilla-emacs)
    - [Testing](#testing)
        - [Unit tests](#unit-tests)
        - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
        - [Continuous Integration](#continuous-integration)
    - [Changelog](#changelog)
    - [Releases](#releases)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

## Decision Making

<!-- TODO(QUESTION): Do we want this much overhead to contributions? -->

When contributing to the project, the following process leads to the best chance
of landing changes:

1. All work on the code base should be motivated by a [Github Issue][]. The
   issue helps capture the problem we're trying to solve and allows for early
   feedback.
2. Once the issue is created, maintainers may request more detailed
   documentation in the form of a [Request for Comment (RFC)][rfc] or
   [Architectural Decision Record (ADR)][adr].
3. Discussion at the RFC stage will build collective understanding of the
   dimensions of the problem and help structure conversations around trade-offs.
4. When the problem is well understood but the solution leads to large
   structural changes to the code base, these changes should be proposed in the
   form of an ADR. The ADR will help build consensus on an overall strategy to
   ensure the code base maintains coherence in the larger context. If you are
   not comfortable with writing an ADR, you can open a less-formal issue and the
   maintainers will help you turn it into an ADR.
5. When the problem and proposed solution are well understood, implementation
   can begin by opening a [pull request](#making-a-pull-request).

## Making a pull request

We develop on the `unstable` branch and release stable code on `master`.

Nontrivial changes should start with a [draft pull request][] against
`unstable`. The draft signals that work is underway. When the work is ready for
feedback, hitting "Ready for Review" will signal to the maintainers that you are
ready for them to take a look.

Where possible, implementation trajectories should aim to proceed as a series of
small, logically distinct, incremental changes, in the form of small PRs that
can be merged quickly. This helps manage the load for reviewers and reduces the
likelihood that PRs will sit open for longer.

Each stage of the process is aimed at creating feedback cycles which align
contributors and maintainers to make sure:

- Contributors don’t waste their time implementing/proposing features which
  won’t land in `main`.
- Maintainers have the necessary context in order to support and review
  contributions.

## Dependencies

For setting up the local build, see the [instructions on building form
source](./docs/manual.md#building-from-source).

### Environment

The necessary shell environment is specified in [.envrc](./.envrc). You can:

- use [direnv][] to load the environment automatically
- source this file manually from your shell
- or use it as a reference for what to put in your preferred rc files

[direnv]: https://direnv.net/

## Development Environment

If you use a different development environment or editor set up, please document
it here!

### IntelliJ IDEA

Download the community edition of [IntelliJ IDEA](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/)
and set up a new project.

### Emacs

You can use the [metals][] Scala language server together with [lsp-mode][] for
a nice IDE experience in the world's best lisp driven operating system.

#### Install `metals-emacs`

##### Arch

Using yay to install from AUR:

```sh
yay -Syu metals
```

#### Doom Emacs

[Doom Emacs][doom-emacs] streamlines configuration and installation:

Edit your [~/.doom.d/init.el](~/.doom.d/init.el), to uncomment `scala` and
configure it use lsp:

```elisp
       (scala              ; java, but good
        +lsp)
```

Run `doom sync` and restart. That's it.

If you hit any snags, you might also consult [this
writeup][writeup]

[doom-emacs]: https://github.com/hlissner/doom-emacs
[metals]: https://scalameta.org/metals/
[lsp-mode]: https://github.com/emacs-lsp/lsp-mode
[writeup]: https://siawyoung.com/blog/code/2020-02-06-installing-metals-emacs-doom

#### Vanilla Emacs

For installation and configuration in vanilla emacs, see
https://scalameta.org/metals/docs/editors/emacs.html

## Testing

### Unit tests

Run the units

```sh
make test
```

### Integration tests

Run the integration tests with

```sh
make integration
```

### Continuous Integration

We run continuous integration tests on the `master` and `unstable` branches via
[Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/github/informalsystems/apalache). The CI configuration
is located in [.travis.yml](./.travis.yml).

## Changelog

Every non-trivial PR must update the [change log](./CHANGES.md).

Changes for a given release should be split between the four sections: Breaking
Changes, Features, Improvements, Bug Fixes.

## Releases

Assuming the version to be released is `l.m.n`, as per semantic versioning, the
current release process is as follows:

- [ ] Update [CHANGES.md](./CHANGES.md), adding the heading `## l.m.n` over the
      unreleased changes.
- [ ] Copy this section into a new file named `./script/release-l.m.n.txt`
- [ ] Open a PR to merge `unstable` into `master`, titling it `Release l.m.n`
- [ ] When the PR is merged, checkout `master` and then run `./script/release
      vl.m.n ./scripts/release-l.m.n.txt`
- [ ] Build an updated docker container `docker build -t apalache/mv:l.m.n`
- [ ] Push the new taged image to dockerhub `docker push apalache/mc:l.m.n`
- [ ] Bump the version in unstable to `l.m.(n+1)` by running `mvn release:update-versions`
- [ ] Post a notification to the (internal) `#releases` slack channel.

[Github Issue]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/issues
[rfc]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Request_for_Comments
[adr]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Architectural_decision
[draft pull request]: https://github.blog/2019-02-14-introducing-draft-pull-requests/
