README.md, before:

<div align="center">
<img
src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/informalsystems/apalache/99e58d6f5eebcc41f432a126a13a5f8d2ae7afe6/logo-apalache.svg"
alt="Apalache Logo">

<h1>APALACHE</h1>

<p>A symbolic model checker for TLA+<p>

|             master             |              unstable              |
| :----------------------------: | :--------------------------------: |
| [![master badge][]][master-ci] | [![unstable badge][]][unstable-ci] |

[master badge]: https://travis-ci.org/informalsystems/apalache.svg?branch=master
[master-ci]: https://travis-ci.org/github/informalsystems/apalache/branches
[unstable badge]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/workflows/build/badge.svg
[unstable-ci]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/actions?query=branch%3Aunstable+workflow%3Abuild

</div>

---

Apalache translates TLA+ into the logic supported by SMT solvers such as
[Microsoft Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3). Apalache can check inductive
invariants (for fixed or bounded parameters) and check safety of bounded
executions (bounded model checking). To see the list of supported TLA+
constructs, check the [supported features](docs/features.md). In general,
Apalache runs under the same assumptions as TLC.

## Releases

Check the [releases page](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/releases).

We recommend that you run the latest stable docker image `apalache/mc:latest`,
or checkout the source code from
[master](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/tree/master), which
accumulates bugfixes over the latest release. For more information, see [the
manual](docs/manual.md#useDocker). To try the latest cool features, check out
the [unstable
branch](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/tree/unstable).

## Getting started

- Read the [Apalache user manual](./docs/manual.md).
- Consult the (WIP) [Idioms for writing better TLA+](./docs/idiomatic)

## Community

- Join the chat in the [Apalache zulip stream](https://informal-systems.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/265309-apalache).
- [Contribute](./CONTRIBUTING.md) to the development of Apalache.

## Talks

- [Model-based testing with TLA+ and Apalache](https://youtu.be/aveoIMphzW8).
  TLA+ Community Event 2020 (October 2020).

- [Type inference for TLA+ in Apalache](https://youtu.be/hnp25hmCMN8).
  TLA+ Community Event 2020 (October 2020).

- [Formal Spec and Model Checking of the Tendermint Blockchain Synchronization Protocol](https://youtu.be/h2Ovc1KWlXM)
  2nd Workshop on Formal Methods for Blockchains (July 2020).

- [Showing safety of Tendermint Consensus with TLA+ and Apalache](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aF20-28sMII).
  Dev session at Informal Systems (May 2020).

- [TLA+ model checking made symbolic](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e66FGgRzaqw)
  OOPSLA 2019 (October 2019).

- [Bounded model checking of TLA+ specifications with SMT](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xl1--arESl8)
  TLA+ Community Event 2018 (July 2018).

## Performance

We are collecting [apalache benchmarks](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache-tests).
See the Apalache performance when
[checking inductive invariants](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache-tests/blob/master/results/001indinv-report.md)
and running
[bounded model checking](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache-tests/blob/master/results/002bmc-report.md). Version 0.6.0 is a major improvement over version 0.5.2
(the version [reported at OOPSLA19](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3360549)).

## Academic papers

To read an academic paper about the theory behind Apalache,
check our [paper at OOPSLA19](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3360549).
Related reports and publications can be found at the
[Apalache page at TU Wien](http://forsyte.at/research/apalache/).

Commit message:

A warning on the broken unstable

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
<img
src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/informalsystems/apalache/99e58d6f5eebcc41f432a126a13a5f8d2ae7afe6/logo-apalache.svg"
alt="Apalache Logo">

<h1>APALACHE</h1>

<p>A symbolic model checker for TLA+<p>

|             master             |              unstable              |
| :----------------------------: | :--------------------------------: |
| [![master badge][]][master-ci] | [![unstable badge][]][unstable-ci] |

[master badge]: https://travis-ci.org/informalsystems/apalache.svg?branch=master
[master-ci]: https://travis-ci.org/github/informalsystems/apalache/branches
[unstable badge]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/workflows/build/badge.svg
[unstable-ci]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/actions?query=branch%3Aunstable+workflow%3Abuild

</div>

---

Apalache translates TLA+ into the logic supported by SMT solvers such as
[Microsoft Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3). Apalache can check inductive
invariants (for fixed or bounded parameters) and check safety of bounded
executions (bounded model checking). To see the list of supported TLA+
constructs, check the [supported features](docs/features.md). In general,
Apalache runs under the same assumptions as TLC.

## Releases

Check the [releases page](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/releases).

We recommend that you run the latest stable docker image `apalache/mc:latest`,
or checkout the source code from
[master](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/tree/master), which
accumulates bugfixes over the latest release. For more information, see [the
manual](docs/manual.md#useDocker). To try the latest cool features, check out
the [unstable
branch](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/tree/unstable).

*The head of `unstable` is broken. We are working on a fix. For the moment,
build the project from 014dd5669417dd8d2f459e4e71840de9e014be73.*

## Getting started

- Read the [Apalache user manual](./docs/manual.md).
- Consult the (WIP) [Idioms for writing better TLA+](./docs/idiomatic)

## Community

- Join the chat in the [Apalache zulip stream](https://informal-systems.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/265309-apalache).
- [Contribute](./CONTRIBUTING.md) to the development of Apalache.

## Talks

- [Model-based testing with TLA+ and Apalache](https://youtu.be/aveoIMphzW8).
  TLA+ Community Event 2020 (October 2020).

- [Type inference for TLA+ in Apalache](https://youtu.be/hnp25hmCMN8).
  TLA+ Community Event 2020 (October 2020).

- [Formal Spec and Model Checking of the Tendermint Blockchain Synchronization Protocol](https://youtu.be/h2Ovc1KWlXM)
  2nd Workshop on Formal Methods for Blockchains (July 2020).

- [Showing safety of Tendermint Consensus with TLA+ and Apalache](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aF20-28sMII).
  Dev session at Informal Systems (May 2020).

- [TLA+ model checking made symbolic](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e66FGgRzaqw)
  OOPSLA 2019 (October 2019).

- [Bounded model checking of TLA+ specifications with SMT](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xl1--arESl8)
  TLA+ Community Event 2018 (July 2018).

## Performance

We are collecting [apalache benchmarks](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache-tests).
See the Apalache performance when
[checking inductive invariants](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache-tests/blob/master/results/001indinv-report.md)
and running
[bounded model checking](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache-tests/blob/master/results/002bmc-report.md). Version 0.6.0 is a major improvement over version 0.5.2
(the version [reported at OOPSLA19](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3360549)).

## Academic papers

To read an academic paper about the theory behind Apalache,
check our [paper at OOPSLA19](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3360549).
Related reports and publications can be found at the
[Apalache page at TU Wien](http://forsyte.at/research/apalache/).
