docs/src/apalache/running.md, before:

# Running the Tool

**Opt-in statistics programme**: if you opt-in for statistics collection (off by default), then every run of Apalache
will submit anonymized statistics to
`tlapl.us`. See the details in [TLA+ Anonymized Execution Statistics](./statistics.html).

## Model checker command-line parameters

The model checker can be run as follows:

```bash
$ apalache check [--config=filename] [--init=Init] [--cinit=ConstInit] \
    [--next=Next] [--inv=Inv] [--length=10] [--algo=(incremental|offline)] \
    [--discard-disabled] [--no-deadlock] [--tuning=filename] [--tune-here=options] \
    <myspec>.tla
```

The arguments are as follows:

* General parameters:
    - `--config` specifies the [TLC configuration file](./tlc-config.md), the default name is `<myspec>.cfg`
    - `--init` specifies the initialization predicate, *`Init` by default*
    - `--next` specifies the transition predicate, *`Next` by default*
    - `--cinit` specifies the constant initialization predicate, *optional*
    - `--inv` specifies the invariant to check, *optional*
    - `--length` specifies the maximal number of `Next` steps, *10 by default*

* Advanced parameters:
    - `--algo` lets you to choose the search algorithm: `incremental` is using the incremental SMT solver, `offline` is
      using the non-incremental
      (offline) SMT solver
    - `--discard-disabled` does a pre-check on transitions and discard the disabled ones at every step. If you know that
      many transitions are always enabled, set it to false. Sometimes, this pre-check may be slower than checking the
      invariant. Default: true.
    - `--max-error <n>` instructs the search to stop after `n` errors, see [Enumeration of counterexamples][]. Default: 1.  
    - `--view <name>` sets the state view to `<name>`, see [Enumeration of counterexamples][].
    - `--no-deadlock` disables deadlock-checking, when `--discard-disabled=false` is on. When `--discard-disabled=true`,
      deadlocks are found in any case.
    - `--tuning` specifies the properties file that stores the options for
      [fine tuning](tuning.md)
    - `--tuning-options=key1=val1:key2=val2:...` pass the tuning options right in the command line as a single string.
      The options that are passed with the option `--tuning-options`
      have priority over the options that are passed with the option `--tuning`.

If an initialization predicate, transition predicate, or invariant is specified both in the configuration file, and on
the command line, the command line parameters take precedence over those in the configuration file.

### Supplying JVM arguments

You can supply JVM argument to be used when running Apalache by setting the
environment variable `JVM_ARGS`. For example, to change the JVM heap size from
the default (`4096m`) to `1G` invoke Apalache as follows:

```sh
JVM_ARGS="-Xmx1G" apalache-mc <args>
```

If you are running Apalache via docker directly (instead of using the script in
`$APALACHE_HOME/script/run-docker.sh`), you'll also need to expose the
environment variable to the docker container:

```sh
$ JVM_ARGS="-Xmx1G" docker run -e JVM_ARGS --rm -v <your-spec-directory>:/var/apalache informalsystems/apalache <args>
```

To track memory usage with: `jcmd <pid> VM.native_memory summary`, you can set

```
JVM_ARGS="-XX:NativeMemoryTracking=summary"
```

### Bounded model checking

By default, Apalache performs *bounded model checking*, that is, it encodes a
symbolic execution of length `k` and a violation of a state invariant in SMT:

```tla
/\ Init[v_0/v]
/\ Next[v_0/v, v_1/v'] /\ Next[v_1/v, v_2/v'] /\ ... /\ Next[v_{k-1}/v, v_k/v']
/\ ~Inv[v_0/v] \/ ~Inv[v_1/v] \/ ... \/ ~Inv[v_k/v]
```

Here an expression `Inv[v_i/v]` means that the state variables `v` are replaced with their copies `v_i` for the
state `i`. Likewise, `Next[v_i/v,v_{i+1}/v']`
means that the state variables `v` are replaced with their copies `v_i` for the state `i`, whereas the state
variables `v'` are replaced with their copies
`v_{i+1}` for the state `i+1`.

#### Bounded model checking is an incomplete technique

If Apalache finds a bug in this symbolic execution (by querying z3), then it reports a counterexample. Otherwise, it
reports that no bug was found up to the given length. If a bug needs a long execution to get revealed, bounded model
checking may miss it!

### Checking an inductive invariant

To check executions of arbitrary lengths, one usually finds a formula that satisfies the two following properties:

```tla
/\ Init => TypeOK /\ IndInv
/\ TypeOK /\ IndInv /\ Next => TypeOK' /\ IndInv'
```

In normal words: (1) The initial states satisfy the constraint `TypeOK /\
IndInv`, and (2) whenever the specification makes a step when starting in a state that satisfies `TypeOK /\ IndInv`, it
ends up in a state that again satisfies `TypeOK /\ IndInv`.

Note that we usually check `IndInv` in conjunction with `TypeOK`, as we have to constrain the variable values. In
the `y2k` example, our inductive invariant is actually constraing the variables. In fact, such an inductive invariant is
usually called `TypeOK`.

To check an inductive invariant ``IndInv`` in Apalache, you run two commands that check the above two formulas:

 - **IndInit**: Check that the initial states satisfy `IndInv`:

    ```bash
    $ apalache check --init=Init --inv=IndInv --length=0 <myspec>.tla
    ```

 - **IndNext**: Check that `Next` does not drive us outside of `IndInv`:

    ```bash
    $ apalache check --init=IndInv --inv=IndInv --length=1 <myspec>.tla
    ```

Usually, you look for an inductive invariant to check a safety predicate. For
example, if you have found an inductive invariant `IndInv` and want to check a
safety predicate `Safety`, you have to run Apalache once again:

 - **IndProp**: Check that all states captured with `IndInv` satisfy the predicate `Safety`:

    ```bash
    $ apalache check --init=IndInv --inv=Safety --length=0 <myspec>.tla
    ```

It may happen that your inductive invariant `IndInv` is too weak and it
violates `Safety`. In this case, you would have to add additional constraints to `IndInv`.
Then you would have to check the queries IndInit, IndNext, and IndProp again.

## Examples

### Checking safety up to 20 steps

```bash
$ cd test/tla
$ apalache check --length=20 --inv=Safety y2k_override.tla
```

This command checks, whether `Safety` can be violated in 20 specification steps. If `Safety` is not violated, your spec
might still have a bug that requires a computation longer than 20 steps to manifest.

### Checking an inductive invariant:

```bash
$ cd test/tla
$ apalache check --length=0 --init=Init --inv=Inv y2k_override.tla
$ apalache check --length=1 --init=Inv  --inv=Inv y2k_override.tla
```

The first call to apalache checks, whether the initial states satisfy the invariant. The second call to apalache checks,
whether a single specification step satisfies the invariant, when starting in a state that satisfies the invariant. (
That is why these invariants are called inductive.)

### Using a constant initializer:

```bash
$ cd test/tla
apalache check --cinit=ConstInit --length=20 --inv=Safety y2k_cinit.tla
```

This command checks, whether `Safety` can be violated in 20 specification steps. The constants are initialized with the
predicate
`ConstInit`, defined in `y2k_cinit.tla` as:

```tla
ConstInit == BIRTH_YEAR \in 0..99 /\ LICENSE_AGE \in 10..99
```

In this case, Apalache finds a safety violation, e.g., for
`BIRTH_YEAR=89` and `LICENSE_AGE=10`. A complete counterexample is printed in `counterexample.tla`.

The final lines in the file clearly indicate the state that violates the invariant:

```tla
State14 ==
/\ BIRTH_YEAR = 89
/\ LICENSE_AGE = 10
/\ hasLicense = TRUE
/\ year = 0

(* The following formula holds true in the last state and violates the invariant *)

InvariantViolation == hasLicense /\ year - BIRTH_YEAR < LICENSE_AGE
```

<a name="lookup"></a>

## Module lookup

Apalache uses [the SANY parser](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tools.html), which is the standard parser of TLC
and TLA+ Toolbox. By default, SANY is looking for the modules in the current working directory and in the Java package
`tla2sany.StandardModules`, which is usually provided by the `tla2tools.jar` that is included in the Java classpath.

In addition to the modules in the current working directory, Appalache provides

- a small standard library (located in `$APALACHE_HOME/src/tla`), and
- support for additional source directories specified in the environment variable `TLA_PATH`. `TLA_PATH` should be a
  list of paths to directories separated by `:`.

(Directories in the `TLA_PATH` are provided to SANY via the `TLA-Library` Java system variable.)

So the module lookup order in Apalache is as follows:

1. The current working directory.
1. The directory `$APALACHE_HOME/src/tla`.
1. The directories specified in the environment variable `TLA_PATH`.
1. The Java package `tla2sany.StandardModules`.

__Note:__ To let TLA+ Toolbox and TLC know about the Apalache modules, include
`$APALACHE_HOME/src/tla` in the lookup directories, as explained by Markus Kuppe for
the [TLA+ Community Modules](https://github.com/tlaplus/CommunityModules).

<a name="detailed"></a>

## Detailed output

The tool will display only important messages on stdout, but a detailed log can be found in `detailed.log`.

Additionally, each pass of the model checker produces an intermediate TLA+ file in the run-specific
directory `x/hh.mm-DD.MM.YYYY-<id>`:

- File `out-parser.tla` is produced as a result of parsing and importing into the intermediate representation, Apalache
  TLA IR.
- File `out-parser.json` is produced as a result of converting the Apalache TLA IR representation of the input into JSON
  format.
- File `out-config.tla` is produced as a result of substituting CONSTANTS, as described
  in [Setting up specification parameters](./parameters.md).
- File `out-inline.tla` is produced as a result of inlining operator definitions and `LET-IN` definitions.
- File `out-priming.tla` is produced as a result of replacing constants and variables in `ConstInit` and `Init` with
  their primed versions.
- File `out-vcgen.tla` is produced as a result of extracting verification conditions, e.g., invariants to check.
- File `out-prepro.tla` is produced as a result of running all preprocessing steps.
- File `out-transition.tla` is produced as a result of finding assignments and symbolic transitions.
- File `out-opt.tla` is produced as a result of expression optimizations.
- File `out-analysis.tla` is produced as a result of analysis, e.g., marking Skolemizable expressions and expressions to
  be expanded.

<a name="parsing"></a>

## Parsing and pretty-printing

If you'd like to check that your TLA+ specification is syntactically correct, without running the model checker, you can
run the following command:

```bash
$ apalache parse <myspec>.tla
```

In this case, Apalache performs the following steps:

1. It parses the specification with [SANY](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tools.html).

1. It translates SANY semantic nodes
   into [Apalache IR](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/master/tlair/src/main/scala/at/forsyte/apalache/tla/lir/package.scala)
   .

1. It pretty-prints the IR into `out-parser.tla`, see [Detailed output](#detailed).

[Enumeration of counterexamples]: ./enumeration.md

Commit message:

OutputManager for files produced by Apalache (#1036)
* OutputManager

* logs

* comments

* removed unnecessary file

* tweaks for logless runs

* string.strip nonsense

* docs

* Update docs/src/apalache/config.md

Co-authored-by: Shon Feder <shon@informal.systems>

* Update docs/src/apalache/config.md

Co-authored-by: Shon Feder <shon@informal.systems>

* Update docs/src/apalache/config.md

Co-authored-by: Shon Feder <shon@informal.systems>

* v2, with YAML

* md

* run.txt

Co-authored-by: Shon Feder <shon@informal.systems>

docs/src/apalache/running.md, after:

# Running the Tool

**Opt-in statistics programme**: if you opt-in for statistics collection (off by default), then every run of Apalache
will submit anonymized statistics to
`tlapl.us`. See the details in [TLA+ Anonymized Execution Statistics](./statistics.html).

## Model checker command-line parameters

The model checker can be run as follows:

```bash
$ apalache check [--config=filename] [--init=Init] [--cinit=ConstInit] \
    [--next=Next] [--inv=Inv] [--length=10] [--algo=(incremental|offline)] \
    [--discard-disabled] [--no-deadlock] [--tuning=filename] [--tune-here=options] \
    <myspec>.tla
```

The arguments are as follows:

* General parameters:
    - `--config` specifies the [TLC configuration file](./tlc-config.md), the default name is `<myspec>.cfg`
    - `--init` specifies the initialization predicate, *`Init` by default*
    - `--next` specifies the transition predicate, *`Next` by default*
    - `--cinit` specifies the constant initialization predicate, *optional*
    - `--inv` specifies the invariant to check, *optional*
    - `--length` specifies the maximal number of `Next` steps, *10 by default*

* Advanced parameters:
    - `--algo` lets you to choose the search algorithm: `incremental` is using the incremental SMT solver, `offline` is
      using the non-incremental
      (offline) SMT solver
    - `--discard-disabled` does a pre-check on transitions and discard the disabled ones at every step. If you know that
      many transitions are always enabled, set it to false. Sometimes, this pre-check may be slower than checking the
      invariant. Default: true.
    - `--max-error <n>` instructs the search to stop after `n` errors, see [Enumeration of counterexamples][]. Default: 1.  
    - `--view <name>` sets the state view to `<name>`, see [Enumeration of counterexamples][].
    - `--no-deadlock` disables deadlock-checking, when `--discard-disabled=false` is on. When `--discard-disabled=true`,
      deadlocks are found in any case.
    - `--tuning` specifies the properties file that stores the options for
      [fine tuning](tuning.md)
    - `--tuning-options=key1=val1:key2=val2:...` pass the tuning options right in the command line as a single string.
      The options that are passed with the option `--tuning-options`
      have priority over the options that are passed with the option `--tuning`.

If an initialization predicate, transition predicate, or invariant is specified both in the configuration file, and on
the command line, the command line parameters take precedence over those in the configuration file.

### Supplying JVM arguments

You can supply JVM argument to be used when running Apalache by setting the
environment variable `JVM_ARGS`. For example, to change the JVM heap size from
the default (`4096m`) to `1G` invoke Apalache as follows:

```sh
JVM_ARGS="-Xmx1G" apalache-mc <args>
```

If you are running Apalache via docker directly (instead of using the script in
`$APALACHE_HOME/script/run-docker.sh`), you'll also need to expose the
environment variable to the docker container:

```sh
$ JVM_ARGS="-Xmx1G" docker run -e JVM_ARGS --rm -v <your-spec-directory>:/var/apalache informalsystems/apalache <args>
```

To track memory usage with: `jcmd <pid> VM.native_memory summary`, you can set

```
JVM_ARGS="-XX:NativeMemoryTracking=summary"
```

### Bounded model checking

By default, Apalache performs *bounded model checking*, that is, it encodes a
symbolic execution of length `k` and a violation of a state invariant in SMT:

```tla
/\ Init[v_0/v]
/\ Next[v_0/v, v_1/v'] /\ Next[v_1/v, v_2/v'] /\ ... /\ Next[v_{k-1}/v, v_k/v']
/\ ~Inv[v_0/v] \/ ~Inv[v_1/v] \/ ... \/ ~Inv[v_k/v]
```

Here an expression `Inv[v_i/v]` means that the state variables `v` are replaced with their copies `v_i` for the
state `i`. Likewise, `Next[v_i/v,v_{i+1}/v']`
means that the state variables `v` are replaced with their copies `v_i` for the state `i`, whereas the state
variables `v'` are replaced with their copies
`v_{i+1}` for the state `i+1`.

#### Bounded model checking is an incomplete technique

If Apalache finds a bug in this symbolic execution (by querying z3), then it reports a counterexample. Otherwise, it
reports that no bug was found up to the given length. If a bug needs a long execution to get revealed, bounded model
checking may miss it!

### Checking an inductive invariant

To check executions of arbitrary lengths, one usually finds a formula that satisfies the two following properties:

```tla
/\ Init => TypeOK /\ IndInv
/\ TypeOK /\ IndInv /\ Next => TypeOK' /\ IndInv'
```

In normal words: (1) The initial states satisfy the constraint `TypeOK /\
IndInv`, and (2) whenever the specification makes a step when starting in a state that satisfies `TypeOK /\ IndInv`, it
ends up in a state that again satisfies `TypeOK /\ IndInv`.

Note that we usually check `IndInv` in conjunction with `TypeOK`, as we have to constrain the variable values. In
the `y2k` example, our inductive invariant is actually constraing the variables. In fact, such an inductive invariant is
usually called `TypeOK`.

To check an inductive invariant ``IndInv`` in Apalache, you run two commands that check the above two formulas:

 - **IndInit**: Check that the initial states satisfy `IndInv`:

    ```bash
    $ apalache check --init=Init --inv=IndInv --length=0 <myspec>.tla
    ```

 - **IndNext**: Check that `Next` does not drive us outside of `IndInv`:

    ```bash
    $ apalache check --init=IndInv --inv=IndInv --length=1 <myspec>.tla
    ```

Usually, you look for an inductive invariant to check a safety predicate. For
example, if you have found an inductive invariant `IndInv` and want to check a
safety predicate `Safety`, you have to run Apalache once again:

 - **IndProp**: Check that all states captured with `IndInv` satisfy the predicate `Safety`:

    ```bash
    $ apalache check --init=IndInv --inv=Safety --length=0 <myspec>.tla
    ```

It may happen that your inductive invariant `IndInv` is too weak and it
violates `Safety`. In this case, you would have to add additional constraints to `IndInv`.
Then you would have to check the queries IndInit, IndNext, and IndProp again.

## Examples

### Checking safety up to 20 steps

```bash
$ cd test/tla
$ apalache check --length=20 --inv=Safety y2k_override.tla
```

This command checks, whether `Safety` can be violated in 20 specification steps. If `Safety` is not violated, your spec
might still have a bug that requires a computation longer than 20 steps to manifest.

### Checking an inductive invariant:

```bash
$ cd test/tla
$ apalache check --length=0 --init=Init --inv=Inv y2k_override.tla
$ apalache check --length=1 --init=Inv  --inv=Inv y2k_override.tla
```

The first call to apalache checks, whether the initial states satisfy the invariant. The second call to apalache checks,
whether a single specification step satisfies the invariant, when starting in a state that satisfies the invariant. (
That is why these invariants are called inductive.)

### Using a constant initializer:

```bash
$ cd test/tla
apalache check --cinit=ConstInit --length=20 --inv=Safety y2k_cinit.tla
```

This command checks, whether `Safety` can be violated in 20 specification steps. The constants are initialized with the
predicate
`ConstInit`, defined in `y2k_cinit.tla` as:

```tla
ConstInit == BIRTH_YEAR \in 0..99 /\ LICENSE_AGE \in 10..99
```

In this case, Apalache finds a safety violation, e.g., for
`BIRTH_YEAR=89` and `LICENSE_AGE=10`. A complete counterexample is printed in `counterexample.tla`.

The final lines in the file clearly indicate the state that violates the invariant:

```tla
State14 ==
/\ BIRTH_YEAR = 89
/\ LICENSE_AGE = 10
/\ hasLicense = TRUE
/\ year = 0

(* The following formula holds true in the last state and violates the invariant *)

InvariantViolation == hasLicense /\ year - BIRTH_YEAR < LICENSE_AGE
```

<a name="lookup"></a>

## Module lookup

Apalache uses [the SANY parser](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tools.html), which is the standard parser of TLC
and TLA+ Toolbox. By default, SANY is looking for the modules in the current working directory and in the Java package
`tla2sany.StandardModules`, which is usually provided by the `tla2tools.jar` that is included in the Java classpath.

In addition to the modules in the current working directory, Appalache provides

- a small standard library (located in `$APALACHE_HOME/src/tla`), and
- support for additional source directories specified in the environment variable `TLA_PATH`. `TLA_PATH` should be a
  list of paths to directories separated by `:`.

(Directories in the `TLA_PATH` are provided to SANY via the `TLA-Library` Java system variable.)

So the module lookup order in Apalache is as follows:

1. The current working directory.
1. The directory `$APALACHE_HOME/src/tla`.
1. The directories specified in the environment variable `TLA_PATH`.
1. The Java package `tla2sany.StandardModules`.

__Note:__ To let TLA+ Toolbox and TLC know about the Apalache modules, include
`$APALACHE_HOME/src/tla` in the lookup directories, as explained by Markus Kuppe for
the [TLA+ Community Modules](https://github.com/tlaplus/CommunityModules).

<a name="detailed"></a>

## Detailed output

The tool will display only important messages on stdout, but a detailed log can be found in `detailed.log`.

Additionally, if enabled in `apalache.cfg` (see [configuration instructions](config.md)) each pass of the model checker produces an intermediate TLA+ file in the run-specific
directory:

- File `out-parser.tla` is produced as a result of parsing and importing into the intermediate representation, Apalache
  TLA IR.
- File `out-config.tla` is produced as a result of substituting CONSTANTS, as described
  in [Setting up specification parameters](./parameters.md).
- File `out-inline.tla` is produced as a result of inlining operator definitions and `LET-IN` definitions.
- File `out-priming.tla` is produced as a result of replacing constants and variables in `ConstInit` and `Init` with
  their primed versions.
- File `out-vcgen.tla` is produced as a result of extracting verification conditions, e.g., invariants to check.
- File `out-prepro.tla` is produced as a result of running all preprocessing steps.
- File `out-transition.tla` is produced as a result of finding assignments and symbolic transitions.
- File `out-opt.tla` is produced as a result of expression optimizations.
- File `out-analysis.tla` is produced as a result of analysis, e.g., marking Skolemizable expressions and expressions to
  be expanded.

<a name="parsing"></a>

## Parsing and pretty-printing

If you'd like to check that your TLA+ specification is syntactically correct, without running the model checker, you can
run the following command:

```bash
$ apalache parse <myspec>.tla
```

In this case, Apalache performs the following steps:

1. It parses the specification with [SANY](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tools.html).

1. It translates SANY semantic nodes
   into [Apalache IR](https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/master/tlair/src/main/scala/at/forsyte/apalache/tla/lir/package.scala)
   .

1. It pretty-prints the IR into `out-parser.tla`, see [Detailed output](#detailed).

[Enumeration of counterexamples]: ./enumeration.md
