test/tla/cli-integration-tests.md, before:

# Apalache CLI Integration Tests

The code blocks in this file use [mdx](https://github.com/realworldocaml/mdx) to
run integration tests of the Apalache CLI interface.

To run these tests, execute the [../mdx-test.py](../mdx-test.py) script with no
arguments.

## How to write a test

Any `sh` code block will be run as a test.

The test executes the command following a `$`. The command is expected to
produce the output on the subsequent lines of the code block.

Some tips:

- Use `...` to omit irrelevant lines in output. This is useful for
  nondeterministic output or to hide noise.
- Specify a non-zero return code `n` by adding `[n]` on a line by itself after
  the output.
- Pipe into filters to get arbitrary control of the expected output.

The usual flow is:

1. Write a failing test that executes the command to be run.
2. Run the test (see below).
3. Check that the corrected output is what you expect, then run `make promote`,
   to copy the output back into this file.
4. Replace any non-essential lines with `...`.

See the documentation on `mdx` for more features and flexibility.

## How to run tests

(From the project root.)

### Run all the tests in this file

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```sh
test/mdx-test.py
```

### Run a single test

Each section, demarcated by headings, can be run selectively by supplying an
argument that matches the heading.

E.g., to run just the test for the `version` command, run

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```sh
test/mdx-test.py "executable prints version"
```

**NOTE**: This only runs code blocks directly in the named section, and will not
include execution of blocks in nested subsections.

### Run all tests in sections matching a pattern

The matching is based on (perl) pattern matching. E.g., you can run all the
tests in sections that include the string `"executable"` in their headings with

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```sh
test/mdx-test.py executable
```

## test environment

### working directory

```sh
$ pwd | grep -o test/tla
test/tla
```

## executing the binary

### executable prints version

```sh
$ apalache-mc version
...
EXITCODE: OK
```

### executable prints help

```sh
$ apalache-mc help
...
EXITCODE: OK
```

## running the parse command

This command parses a TLA+ specification with the SANY parser.

### parse Rec12 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc parse Rec12.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
EXITCODE: OK
...
```

## running the check command

### check Bug20190118 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=1 --init=Init --next=Next --inv=Inv Bug20190118.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check mis.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=IsIndependent mis.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check mis_bug.tla errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=IsIndependent mis_bug.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```


### check ast.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 ast.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check pr.tla suceeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=2 pr.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check EWD840.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv EWD840.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Paxos.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv Paxos.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Bug20190118 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=1 Bug20190118.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Bug20190921 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --cinit=CInit Bug20190921.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Counter.tla errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv Counter.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```

### y2k.tla

#### check y2k with length 20 and ConstInit errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=20 --inv=Safety --cinit=ConstInit y2k_cinit.tla  | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```

#### check y2k with length 19 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=19 --inv=Safety y2k_instance.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

#### check y2k with length 30 errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=30 --inv=Safety y2k_instance.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```

### check Counter.tla errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv Counter.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```

### check NatCounter.tla errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv NatCounter.tla  | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
...
```

### check NeedForTypesWithTypes.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --cinit=ConstInit --inv=Inv NeedForTypesWithTypes.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check HandshakeWithTypes.tla with length 4 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=4 --inv=Inv HandshakeWithTypes.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check HandshakeWithTypes.tla with lengh 5 deadlocks

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv HandshakeWithTypes.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Deadlock
...
```

### check trivial violation of FALSE invariant

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=2 --inv=Inv Bug20200306.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
...
```

### check Init without an assignment fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=1 --inv=Inv Assignments20200309.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check Inline.tla suceeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 Inline.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec1.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv Rec1.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec3.tla succeeds
```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv Rec3.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec8.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv Rec8.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec9.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv Rec9.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec10.tla fails without UNROLL_DEFAULT_Fact

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Rec10.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
Input error (see the manual): Recursive operator Fact requires an annotation UNROLL_DEFAULT_Fact. See: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/unstable/docs/manual.md#recursion
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
```

### check Rec11.tla fails without UNROLL_TIMES_Fact

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Rec11.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
Input error (see the manual): Recursive operator Fact requires an annotation UNROLL_TIMES_Fact. See: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/unstable/docs/manual.md#recursion
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
```


### check ExistsAsValue.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --inv=Inv ExistsAsValue.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Empty.tla fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Empty.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check HourClock.tla without Init fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --init=NonExistantInit HourClock.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check HourClock.tla without Next fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --next=NonExistantNext HourClock.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check HourClock.tla without Inv fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --inv=NonExistantInv HourClock.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check use of TLA_PATH for modules in child directory succeeds

```sh
$ TLA_PATH=./tla-path-tests apalache-mc check ./tla-path-tests/ImportingModule.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

## configure the check command

Testing various flags that are set via command-line options and the TLC
configuration file. The CLI has priority over the TLC config. So we have to
test that it all works together.

### configure default Init and Next

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Config.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
  > Command line option --init is not set. Using Init
  > Command line option --next is not set. Using Next
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init
  > Set the transition predicate to Next
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### configure an invariant via CLI

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --inv=Inv Config.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
  > Set an invariant to Inv
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### configure all params via CLI

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --init=Init1 --next=Next1 --inv=Inv Config.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init1
  > Set the transition predicate to Next1
  > Set an invariant to Inv
...
The outcome is: Error
...
```

### configure via TLC config

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --config=Config1.cfg Config.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
  > Loading TLC configuration from Config1.cfg
...
  > Config1.cfg: PROPERTY AwesomeLiveness is ignored. Only INVARIANTS are supported.
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init1
  > Set the transition predicate to Next1
  > Set an invariant to Inv1
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### configure via TLC config and override it via CLI

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --config=Config1.cfg --init=Init2 --next=Next2 Config.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
  > Loading TLC configuration from Config1.cfg
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init2
  > Set the transition predicate to Next2
  > Set an invariant to Inv1
...
The outcome is: Error
...
```

### configure missing property in TLC config 

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --config=Config3.cfg Config.tla | sed 's/[IE]@.*//'
...
  > Loading TLC configuration from Config3.cfg
...
Configuration error (see the manual): Operator NoLiveness not found (used as a temporal property)
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
```

### configure via TLC config with SPECIFICATION

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --config=Config2.cfg Config.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
  > Loading TLC configuration from Config2.cfg
...
  > Config2.cfg: Using SPECIFICATION Spec2
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init2
  > Set the transition predicate to Next2
  > Set an invariant to Inv2
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### configure complains about circular dependencies

```sh
$ apalache-mc check ConfigUnsorted.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
Configuration error (see the manual): Circular definition dependency detected
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
```

Commit message:

Inlining lambdas and removing unused definitions (#301)
inline lambdas and fix #283 (filtered unused operators)

test/tla/cli-integration-tests.md, after:

# Apalache CLI Integration Tests

The code blocks in this file use [mdx](https://github.com/realworldocaml/mdx) to
run integration tests of the Apalache CLI interface.

To run these tests, execute the [../mdx-test.py](../mdx-test.py) script with no
arguments.

## How to write a test

Any `sh` code block will be run as a test.

The test executes the command following a `$`. The command is expected to
produce the output on the subsequent lines of the code block.

Some tips:

- Use `...` to omit irrelevant lines in output. This is useful for
  nondeterministic output or to hide noise.
- Specify a non-zero return code `n` by adding `[n]` on a line by itself after
  the output.
- Pipe into filters to get arbitrary control of the expected output.

The usual flow is:

1. Write a failing test that executes the command to be run.
2. Run the test (see below).
3. Check that the corrected output is what you expect, then run `make promote`,
   to copy the output back into this file.
4. Replace any non-essential lines with `...`.

See the documentation on `mdx` for more features and flexibility.

## How to run tests

(From the project root.)

### Run all the tests in this file

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```sh
test/mdx-test.py
```

### Run a single test

Each section, demarcated by headings, can be run selectively by supplying an
argument that matches the heading.

E.g., to run just the test for the `version` command, run

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```sh
test/mdx-test.py "executable prints version"
```

**NOTE**: This only runs code blocks directly in the named section, and will not
include execution of blocks in nested subsections.

### Run all tests in sections matching a pattern

The matching is based on (perl) pattern matching. E.g., you can run all the
tests in sections that include the string `"executable"` in their headings with

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```sh
test/mdx-test.py executable
```

## test environment

### working directory

```sh
$ pwd | grep -o test/tla
test/tla
```

## executing the binary

### executable prints version

```sh
$ apalache-mc version
...
EXITCODE: OK
```

### executable prints help

```sh
$ apalache-mc help
...
EXITCODE: OK
```

## running the parse command

This command parses a TLA+ specification with the SANY parser.

### parse Rec12 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc parse Rec12.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
EXITCODE: OK
...
```

## running the check command

### check Bug20190118 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=1 --init=Init --next=Next --inv=Inv Bug20190118.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check mis.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=IsIndependent mis.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check mis_bug.tla errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=IsIndependent mis_bug.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```


### check ast.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 ast.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check pr.tla suceeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=2 pr.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check EWD840.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv EWD840.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Paxos.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv Paxos.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Bug20190118 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=1 Bug20190118.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Bug20190921 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --cinit=CInit Bug20190921.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Counter.tla errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv Counter.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```

### y2k.tla

#### check y2k with length 20 and ConstInit errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=20 --inv=Safety --cinit=ConstInit y2k_cinit.tla  | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```

#### check y2k with length 19 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=19 --inv=Safety y2k_instance.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

#### check y2k with length 30 errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=30 --inv=Safety y2k_instance.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```

### check Counter.tla errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv Counter.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
Checker has found an error
...
```

### check NatCounter.tla errors

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv NatCounter.tla  | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
...
```

### check NeedForTypesWithTypes.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --cinit=ConstInit --inv=Inv NeedForTypesWithTypes.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check HandshakeWithTypes.tla with length 4 succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=4 --inv=Inv HandshakeWithTypes.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check HandshakeWithTypes.tla with lengh 5 deadlocks

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv HandshakeWithTypes.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Deadlock
...
```

### check trivial violation of FALSE invariant

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=2 --inv=Inv Bug20200306.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: Error
...
```

### check Init without an assignment fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=1 --inv=Inv Assignments20200309.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check Inline.tla suceeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 Inline.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec1.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv Rec1.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec3.tla succeeds
```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv Rec3.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec8.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=10 --inv=Inv Rec8.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec9.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --length=5 --inv=Inv Rec9.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Rec10.tla fails without UNROLL_DEFAULT_Fact

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Rec10.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
Input error (see the manual): Recursive operator Fact requires an annotation UNROLL_DEFAULT_Fact. See: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/unstable/docs/manual.md#recursion
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
```

### check Rec11.tla fails without UNROLL_TIMES_Fact

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Rec11.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
Input error (see the manual): Recursive operator Fact requires an annotation UNROLL_TIMES_Fact. See: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/unstable/docs/manual.md#recursion
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
```


### check ExistsAsValue.tla succeeds

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --inv=Inv ExistsAsValue.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check Empty.tla fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Empty.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check HourClock.tla without Init fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --init=NonExistantInit HourClock.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check HourClock.tla without Next fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --next=NonExistantNext HourClock.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check HourClock.tla without Inv fails

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --inv=NonExistantInv HourClock.tla
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
[99]
```

### check Callback.tla succeeds

`Callback.tla` demonstrates that one can implement non-determinism with
the existential operator and use a callback to do an assignment to a variable.
As it requires tricky operator inlining, here is the test.

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Callback.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### check use of TLA_PATH for modules in child directory succeeds

```sh
$ TLA_PATH=./tla-path-tests apalache-mc check ./tla-path-tests/ImportingModule.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

## configure the check command

Testing various flags that are set via command-line options and the TLC
configuration file. The CLI has priority over the TLC config. So we have to
test that it all works together.

### configure default Init and Next

```sh
$ apalache-mc check Config.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
  > Command line option --init is not set. Using Init
  > Command line option --next is not set. Using Next
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init
  > Set the transition predicate to Next
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### configure an invariant via CLI

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --inv=Inv Config.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
  > Set an invariant to Inv
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### configure all params via CLI

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --init=Init1 --next=Next1 --inv=Inv Config.tla | sed 's/I@.*//'
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init1
  > Set the transition predicate to Next1
  > Set an invariant to Inv
...
The outcome is: Error
...
```

### configure via TLC config

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --config=Config1.cfg Config.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
  > Config1.cfg: Loading TLC configuration
...
  > Config1.cfg: PROPERTY AwesomeLiveness is ignored. Only INVARIANTS are supported.
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init1
  > Set the transition predicate to Next1
  > Set an invariant to Inv1
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### configure via TLC config and override it via CLI

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --config=Config1.cfg --init=Init2 --next=Next2 Config.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
  > Config1.cfg: Loading TLC configuration
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init2
  > Set the transition predicate to Next2
  > Set an invariant to Inv1
...
The outcome is: Error
...
```

### configure missing property in TLC config 

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --config=Config3.cfg Config.tla | sed 's/[IE]@.*//'
...
  > Config3.cfg: Loading TLC configuration
...
Configuration error (see the manual): Operator NoLiveness not found (used as a temporal property)
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
```

### configure via TLC config with SPECIFICATION

```sh
$ apalache-mc check --config=Config2.cfg Config.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
  > Config2.cfg: Loading TLC configuration
...
  > Config2.cfg: Using SPECIFICATION Spec2
...
  > Set the initialization predicate to Init2
  > Set the transition predicate to Next2
  > Set an invariant to Inv2
...
The outcome is: NoError
...
```

### configure complains about circular dependencies

```sh
$ apalache-mc check ConfigUnsorted.tla | sed 's/[IEW]@.*//'
...
Configuration error (see the manual): Circular definition dependency detected
...
EXITCODE: ERROR (99)
```
