# ADR-005: JSON Serialization Format

| author       | revision |
| ------------ | --------:|
| Jure Kukovec |        1 |

This ADR documents our decision on serializing the Apalache internal representation (IR) as JSON.
The purpose of introducing such a serialization is to expose the internal representation in a standardized format, which can be used for persistent storage, or for analysis by third-party tools in the future.

## 1. Serializable classes

The following classes are serializable:
1. TLA+ expressions `TlaEx` and subclasses thereof:
  1. Named expressions `NameEx`
  1. Literal values `ValEx` for the following literals:
    1. Integers `TlaInt`
    1. Strings `TlaStr`
    1. Booleans `TlaBool`
    1. Decimals `TlaDecimal`
  1. Operator expressions `OperEx`
  1. LET-IN expressions `LetInEx`
1. TLA+ declarations `TlaDecl` and subclasses thereof:
  1. Variable declarations `TlaVarDecl`
  1. Constant declarations `TlaConstDecl`
  1. Operator declarations `TlaOperDecl`
  1. Assumption declarations `TlaAssumeDecl`
  1. Theorem declarations `TlaTheoremDecl`
1. TLA+ modules `TlaModule`

## 2. Disambiguation field

Every serialization will contain a disambiguation field, named `kind`. This field holds the name of the class being serialized. For example, the serialization of a `NameEx` will have the shape
```
{
  "kind": "NameEx"
  ...
}
```

## 3. Serializing tagged entities

Serializations of entities annotated with a `TypeTag` will have an additional field named `type`, containing the type of the expression (see [ADR-002][], [ADR-004][] for a description of our type system and the syntax for types-as-string-annotations respectively), if the tag is `Typed`, or `Untyped` otherwise. For example, the integer literal `1` is represented by a `ValEx`, which has type `Int` and is serialized as follows:
```
{
  "kind": "ValEx",
  "type": "Int"
  ...
}
```
in the typed encoding, or 
```
{
  "kind": "ValEx",
  "type": "Untyped"
  ...
}
```
in the untyped encoding.

## 4. Source information
Entities in the internal representation are usually annotated with source information, of the form `{filename}:{startLine}:{startColumn}-{endLine}:{endColumn}`, relating them to a file range in the provided specification (from which they may have been transformed as part of preprocessing).
JSON encodings may, but are not required to, contain a `source` providing this information, of the following shape:
```
{
  "source": {
    "filename" : <FILENAME>,
    "from" : {
      "line" : <STARTLINE>,
      "column" : <STARTCOLUMN>
    },
    "to" : {
      "line" : <ENDLINE>,
      "column" : <ENDCOLUMN>
    }
  }
}
```
or
```
{
  "source": "UNKNOWN"
}
```
if no source information is available (e.g. for expressions generated purely by Apalache).
Serializations generated by Apalache are always guaranteed to contain a `source` field entry.

Example:
```
{
  "kind" : "NameEx",
  "type" : "Int",
  "name" : "myName",
  "source": {
    "filename" : "MyModule.tla",
    "from" : {
      "line" : 3,
      "column" : 5
    },
    "to" : {
      "line" : 3,
      "column" : 10
    }
  }
}
```

## 5. Version information
JSON serializations of `TlaModule`s contain a filed named `version`, holding a string representation of the current JSON encoding version, shaped `{major}.{minor}`.
This document defines JSON Version 1.0. If and when a different JSON version is defined, this document will be updated accordingly.
Apalache may refuse to import, or trigger warnings for, JSON objects with obsolete versions of the encoding in the future.
Example:
```
{
  "kind": "TlaModule",
  "name": "MyModule",
  "version": "1.0"
  ...
}
```

## 6. General serialization rules

The goal of the serialization is for the JSON structure to mimic the internal representation as closely as possible, for ease of deserialization. 
Concretely, whenever a class declares a field `fld: T`, its serialization also contains a field named `fld`, containing the serialization of the field value.
For example, if `TlaConstDecl` declares a `name: String` field, its JSON serialization will have a `name` field as well, containing the name string.

If a class field has the type `Traversable[T]`, for some `T`, the corresponding JSON entry is a list containing serializations of the individual arguments. For example, `OperEx` is variadic and declares `args: TlaEx*`, so its serialization has an `args` field containing a (possibly empty) list.

As a running example, take the expression `1 + 1`, represented with the correct type annotations as 
```
OperEx( 
  oper = TlaArithOper.plus, 
  args = Seq( 
    ValEx( TlaInt( 1 ) )( typeTag = Typed( IntT1() ) ), 
    ValEx( TlaInt( 1 ) )( typeTag = Typed( IntT1() ) )
    ) 
  )( typeTag = Typed( IntT1() ) )
```

Since both sub-expressions, the literals `1`, are identical, their serializations are equal as well:
```
{
  "kind": "ValEx",
  "type": "Int",
  "value": {
    "kind": "TlaInt",
    "value": 1
  }
}
```

Observe that we choose to serialize `TlaValue` as a JSON object, which is more verbose, but trivial to deserialize. It has the following shape
```
{
  "kind": _ ,
  "value": _
}
```

The `value` field depends on the kind of `TlaValue`:
1. For `TlaStr`: a JSON string
1. For `TlaBool`: a JSON Boolean
1. For `TlaInt(bigIntValue)`: 
  1. If `bigIntValue.isValidInt`: a JSON number
  2. Otherwise: `{ "bigInt: bigIntValue.toString() }`
1. For `TlaDecimal(decValue)`: a JSON string `decValue.toString`

The reason for the non-uniform treatment of integers, is that Apalache encodes its TLA+ integers as `BigInt`, which means that it permits values, for which `.isValidInt` does not hold. 

While it might seem more natural to encode the entire `TlaValue` as a JSON primitive, without the added object layer, we would have a much tougher time deserializing.
We would need a) a sensible encoding of `BigInt` values, which are not valid integers, and b) a way to distinguish both variants of `BigInt`, as well as decimals, when deserializing (since JSON is not typed).
We could encode all values as strings, but they would be similarly indistinguishable when deserializing. Importantly, the `type` field of the `ValEx` expression is not guaranteed to contain a hint, as it could be `Untyped`

Take `jsonOf1` to be the serialization of `ValEx( TlaInt( 1 ) )( typeTag = Typed( IntT1() ) )` shown above. The serialization of `1 + 1` is then equal to
```
{
  "kind": "OperEx",
  "type": "Int",
  "oper": "(+)",
  "args": [jsonOf1, jsonOf1]
}
```
In general, for any given `oper: TlaOper` of `OperEx`, the value of the `oper` field in the serialization equals `oper.name`.

## 7. Implementation

The implementation of the serialization can be found in the class
`at.forsyte.apalache.io.json.TlaToJson` of the module `tla-import`, see [TlaToJson][].

[ADR-002]: https://apalache.informal.systems/docs/adr/002adr-types.html

[ADR-004]: https://apalache.informal.systems/docs/adr/004adr-annotations.html

[TlaToJson]: https://github.com/informalsystems/apalache/blob/unstable/tla-import/src/main/scala/at/forsyte/apalache/io/json/TlaToJson.scala
