docs/internal/user-stories/user-interview-questions.md, before:

# Questions to Ask During User Interviews

The goal of the interviews is to ... TODO

- [ ] Why are you writing TLA+ specs?
- [ ] Are you currently in the process of writing a TLA+ spec? Which spec? [(if
      not) What was the last spec you worked on?]
- [ ] What kind of goals do you have in mind when you set out to write a spec?
- [ ] When working on your own projects, what tools/approaches/devices to you
      reach for when you want to clarify/formalize your thinking?
- [ ] Do you find writing TLA+ specs enjoyable/interesting?
- [ ] What does your typical work process look like when you are writing (or
      preparing to write) a spec?
- [ ] What applications/references do you use when writing a spec?
  - editor
  - websites
  - reference material
  - model checker
  - other tooling
- [ ] What are the biggest pain points you encounter while writing TLA+?
- [ ] What are the biggest pain points you encounter while using TLC?
- [ ] What are the biggest pain points you encounter while using Apalache?
- [ ] What kind of feelings do you associate with writing a TLA+ specs?
      [excitement, bordem, frustration, etc?]

Commit message:

Add background question to user stories

docs/internal/user-stories/user-interview-questions.md, after:

# Questions to Ask During User Interviews

The goal of the interviews is to ... TODO

- [ ] What is your background and how did you come to formal
      specification/verification?
- [ ] Why are you writing TLA+ specs?
- [ ] Are you currently in the process of writing a TLA+ spec? Which spec? [(if
      not) What was the last spec you worked on?]
- [ ] What kind of goals do you have in mind when you set out to write a spec?
- [ ] When working on your own projects, what tools/approaches/devices to you
      reach for when you want to clarify/formalize your thinking?
- [ ] Do you find writing TLA+ specs enjoyable/interesting?
- [ ] What does your typical work process look like when you are writing (or
      preparing to write) a spec?
- [ ] What applications/references do you use when writing a spec?
  - editor
  - websites
  - reference material
  - model checker
  - other tooling
- [ ] What are the biggest pain points you encounter while writing TLA+?
- [ ] What are the biggest pain points you encounter while using TLC?
- [ ] What are the biggest pain points you encounter while using Apalache?
- [ ] What kind of feelings do you associate with writing a TLA+ specs?
      [excitement, bordem, frustration, etc?]
