docs/features.md, before:

Here is the list of the TLA+ language features that are currently supported by our model checker, following the [Summary of TLA+][cheat].

## Language

### Module-Level constructs

Construct  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``EXTENDS module`` | ✔ | - | As soon as SANY imports the module. Some standard modules are not supported yet
``CONSTANTS C1, C2`` | ✔ | -  | Either define a ``ConstInit`` operator to initialize the constants, or declare operators instead of constants, e.g., C1 == 111
``VARIABLES x, y, z`` | ✔ | - |
``ASSUME P`` | ✖ | - | Parsed, but not propagated to the solver
``F(x1, ..., x_n) == exp`` | ✔ / ✖ | `0.7-dev-calls` | Provisionally, any use of F is replaced with its body. Hence, recursive operators are not supported yet.
``f[x ∈ S] == exp`` | ? | `0.7-dev-calls` | A global function is replaced by an equivalent operator declaration. This feature has not been tested yet.
``INSTANCE M WITH ...`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | ``~>``, ``\cdot``, ``ENABLED`` are not treated specially 
``N(x1, ..., x_n) == INSTANCE M WITH...`` | ✔ / ✖ | `0.5-dev-calls` | Parameterized instances are not supported yet, LOCAL operator definitions inside instances may fail to work
``THEOREM P`` | ✖ | - | 
``LOCAL def`` | ✔ | - | Handled by SANY 

### The constant operators

#### Logic

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
∧, ∨, ¬, ⇒, ⇔, ≡ | ✔ | - | ∧, ∨ are translated to ``IF-THEN-ELSE``, using the short circuit semantics, similar to TLC
``TRUE``, ``FALSE``, ``BOOLEAN`` | ✔ | - |
``∀x ∈ S: p``, ``∃x ∈ S : p`` |  ✔ | - |
``CHOOSE x ∈ S : p`` |  ✔/✖ | - | Similar to TLC, we implement a non-deterministic choice. We will add a deterministic version in the future.
``CHOOSE x : x ∉ S`` |  ✖ | `0.5-dev-lang` | That is a commonly used idiom
``∀x : p, ∃x : p`` |  ✖ | **NEVER** | Use the versions above
``CHOOSE x : p`` |  ✖ | **NEVER** | Use the version above


#### Sets

*Note that only the finite sets are supported*.

In the following, we sometimes denote sets as:
 
 * *explicit*, that is, constructed with {...} and the standard set operators such as union, intersection, comprehension, etc.
 * *symbolic*, that is, constructed with SUBSET S or [S -> T].

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
=, ≠, ∈, ∉, ⋂, ⋃, ⊆, \  | ✔ | - |
``{e_1, ..., e_n}`` | ✔ | - | Empty sets ``{}`` require [type annotations](types-and-annotations.md)
``{x ∈ S : p}`` | ✔ | - |
``{e : x ∈ S}`` | ✔ | - |
``SUBSET S`` | ✔ | - | Provided that S is *explicit*. Produces a *symbolic* set.
``UNION S`` |  ✔ | - | Provided that S is *explicit*

#### Functions

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``f[e]`` | ✔ | - |
``DOMAIN f`` | ✔ | - |
``[ x ∈ S ↦ e]`` | ✔ / ✖ | - |  
``[ S → T ]`` | ✔ | - | Produces a *symbolic* set
``[ f EXCEPT ![e1] = e2 ]`` | ✔ | - | 

#### Records

*Use [type annotations](types-and-annotations.md) to help the model checker in finding the right types.*
Note that our type system distinguishes records from general functions.

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``e.h`` | ✔ | - |
``r[e]`` | ✔/✖ | - | Provided that e is a constant expression.
``[ h1 ↦ e1, ..., h_n ↦ e_n]`` | ✔ | - |
``[ h1 : S1, ..., h_n : S_n]`` | ✔ | - |
``[ r EXCEPT !.h = e]`` | ✔ | - |

#### Tuples

*Use [type annotations](types-and-annotations.md) to help the model checker in finding the right types.*
Note that our type system distinguishes tuples from general functions.

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``e[i]`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Provided that ``i`` is a constant expression
``<< e1, ..., e_n >>`` | ✔ | - | By default, a tuple is constructed. Use a [type annotation](types-and-annotations.md) to construct a sequence of proper type.
``S1 x ... x S_n`` | ✔ | - |
``[ t EXCEPT ![i] = e]`` | ✔/✖ | - | Provided that ``i`` is a constant expression 

#### Strings and numbers
 
Construct  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``"c1...c_n"`` | ✔ | - | A string is always mapped to a unique uninterpreted constant
``STRING`` | ✖ | - | It is an infinite set. We cannot handle infinite sets.
``d1...d_n`` | ✔ | - | As long as the SMT solver (Z3) accepts that large number
``d1...d_n.d_n+1...d_m`` | ✖ | - | Technical issue. We could have implemented it.

#### Miscellaneous Constructs

Construct  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``IF p THEN e1 ELSE e2`` | ✔ | - | Provided that both e1 and e2 have the same type
``CASE p1→ e1 ▢ ... ▢ p_n → e_n`` | ✔ | - | Provided that all the expressions have the same type. Similar to TLC, the case expression is translated to series of IF-THEN-ELSE expressions.
``CASE p1→ e1 ▢ ... ▢ p_n → e_n ▢ OTHER → e`` | ✔ | - | See the comment above
``LET d1 == e1 ... d_n == e_n IN e`` | ✔ / ✖ | `0.7-dev-calls` | Provisionally, all usages of d1, ..., d_n are replaced with the expressions e1, ... e_n respectively.
multi-line /\ and \/ | ✔ | - | 

### The Action Operators

Construct  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``e'`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Provided that e is a variable
``[A]_e`` | ✖ | - | It does not matter for safety
``< A >_e`` | ✖ | - |
``ENABLED A`` | ✖ | - |	
``UNCHANGED <<e_1, ..., e_k>>`` | ✔ | - |	Always replaced with ``e_1' = e_1 /\ ... /\ e_k' = e_k``
``A ∙ B`` | ✖ | - |
	
### The Temporal Operators
	
The model checker assumes that the specification has the form Init /\ ▢[Next]_e. Given an invariant candidate Inv, the tool checks, whether Inv is violated by an execution whose length is bounded by the given argument.

Except the standard form Init /\ ▢[Next]_e, no temporal operators are supported.

## Standard modules

### Integers and Naturals

For the moment, the model checker does not differentiate between integers and naturals. They are all translated as integers in SMT.

**TODO: explicitly add the constraint x >= 0 for the naturals.**

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
+, -, *, <=, >=, <, > | ✔ | - | These operators are translated into integer arithmetic of the SMT solver. Linear integer arithmetic is preferred.
/, % | ✔ | - | Integer division and modulo
``a^b`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Provided a and b are constant expressions. 
``a..b`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Provided a and b are constant expressions. In general, use ``{x \in A..B : a <= x /\ x <= b}``, if you know constant bounds ``A`` and ``B`` on the variables ``a`` and ``b``. 
``Int``, ``Nat`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Only supported in ``\E x \in Nat: p`` and ``\E x \in Int: p``, if the expression is not located under ``\A`` and ``~``. 
÷ | ✖ | - | Real division, not supported

### Sequences

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``<<...>>``, ``Head``, ``Tail``, ``Len``, ``SubSeq`` | ✔ | - | Supported in `0.5-dev-lang`. The sequence constructor ``<<...>>`` needs a [type annotation](types-and-annotations.md).
``EXCEPT`` and ``\o`` | ✖ | `0.5-dev-lang` | these operators do not seem to be often used
``Seq(S)`` | ✖ | - | We need an upper bound on the length of the sequences.
``SelectSeq`` | ✖ | - | will not be supported in the near future

### FiniteSets

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``IsFinite`` | ✔ | - | Always returns true, as all the supported sets are finite
``Cardinality`` | ✔ | - | Try to avoid it, as Cardinality(S) produces ``O(n^2)`` constraints in SMT for cardinality `n`

### TLC

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``f @@ a :> b`` | ✔ | - | Supported in `0.5-dev-lang`. Extends the function relation with the pair ``<<a, b>>``

### Reals

Not supported, not a priority




[cheat]: https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/summary.pdf

Commit message:

limited support for Nat and Int to check Bakery

docs/features.md, after:

Here is the list of the TLA+ language features that are currently supported by our model checker, following the [Summary of TLA+][cheat].

## Language

### Module-Level constructs

Construct  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``EXTENDS module`` | ✔ | - | As soon as SANY imports the module. Some standard modules are not supported yet
``CONSTANTS C1, C2`` | ✔ | -  | Either define a ``ConstInit`` operator to initialize the constants, or declare operators instead of constants, e.g., C1 == 111
``VARIABLES x, y, z`` | ✔ | - |
``ASSUME P`` | ✖ | - | Parsed, but not propagated to the solver
``F(x1, ..., x_n) == exp`` | ✔ / ✖ | `0.7-dev-calls` | Provisionally, any use of F is replaced with its body. Hence, recursive operators are not supported yet.
``f[x ∈ S] == exp`` | ? | `0.7-dev-calls` | A global function is replaced by an equivalent operator declaration. This feature has not been tested yet.
``INSTANCE M WITH ...`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | ``~>``, ``\cdot``, ``ENABLED`` are not treated specially 
``N(x1, ..., x_n) == INSTANCE M WITH...`` | ✔ / ✖ | `0.5-dev-calls` | Parameterized instances are not supported yet, LOCAL operator definitions inside instances may fail to work
``THEOREM P`` | ✖ | - | 
``LOCAL def`` | ✔ | - | Handled by SANY 

### The constant operators

#### Logic

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
∧, ∨, ¬, ⇒, ⇔, ≡ | ✔ | - | ∧, ∨ are translated to ``IF-THEN-ELSE``, using the short circuit semantics, similar to TLC
``TRUE``, ``FALSE``, ``BOOLEAN`` | ✔ | - |
``∀x ∈ S: p``, ``∃x ∈ S : p`` |  ✔ | - |
``CHOOSE x ∈ S : p`` |  ✔/✖ | - | Similar to TLC, we implement a non-deterministic choice. We will add a deterministic version in the future.
``CHOOSE x : x ∉ S`` |  ✖ | `0.5-dev-lang` | That is a commonly used idiom
``∀x : p, ∃x : p`` |  ✖ | **NEVER** | Use the versions above
``CHOOSE x : p`` |  ✖ | **NEVER** | Use the version above


#### Sets

*Note that only the finite sets are supported*.

In the following, we sometimes denote sets as:
 
 * *explicit*, that is, constructed with {...} and the standard set operators such as union, intersection, comprehension, etc.
 * *symbolic*, that is, constructed with SUBSET S or [S -> T].

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
=, ≠, ∈, ∉, ⋂, ⋃, ⊆, \  | ✔ | - |
``{e_1, ..., e_n}`` | ✔ | - | Empty sets ``{}`` require [type annotations](types-and-annotations.md)
``{x ∈ S : p}`` | ✔ | - |
``{e : x ∈ S}`` | ✔ | - |
``SUBSET S`` | ✔ | - | Provided that S is *explicit*. Produces a *symbolic* set.
``UNION S`` |  ✔ | - | Provided that S is *explicit*

#### Functions

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``f[e]`` | ✔ | - |
``DOMAIN f`` | ✔ | - |
``[ x ∈ S ↦ e]`` | ✔ / ✖ | - |  
``[ S → T ]`` | ✔ | - | Produces a *symbolic* set
``[ f EXCEPT ![e1] = e2 ]`` | ✔ | - | 

#### Records

*Use [type annotations](types-and-annotations.md) to help the model checker in finding the right types.*
Note that our type system distinguishes records from general functions.

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``e.h`` | ✔ | - |
``r[e]`` | ✔/✖ | - | Provided that e is a constant expression.
``[ h1 ↦ e1, ..., h_n ↦ e_n]`` | ✔ | - |
``[ h1 : S1, ..., h_n : S_n]`` | ✔ | - |
``[ r EXCEPT !.h = e]`` | ✔ | - |

#### Tuples

*Use [type annotations](types-and-annotations.md) to help the model checker in finding the right types.*
Note that our type system distinguishes tuples from general functions.

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``e[i]`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Provided that ``i`` is a constant expression
``<< e1, ..., e_n >>`` | ✔ | - | By default, a tuple is constructed. Use a [type annotation](types-and-annotations.md) to construct a sequence of proper type.
``S1 x ... x S_n`` | ✔ | - |
``[ t EXCEPT ![i] = e]`` | ✔/✖ | - | Provided that ``i`` is a constant expression 

#### Strings and numbers
 
Construct  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``"c1...c_n"`` | ✔ | - | A string is always mapped to a unique uninterpreted constant
``STRING`` | ✖ | - | It is an infinite set. We cannot handle infinite sets.
``d1...d_n`` | ✔ | - | As long as the SMT solver (Z3) accepts that large number
``d1...d_n.d_n+1...d_m`` | ✖ | - | Technical issue. We could have implemented it.

#### Miscellaneous Constructs

Construct  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``IF p THEN e1 ELSE e2`` | ✔ | - | Provided that both e1 and e2 have the same type
``CASE p1→ e1 ▢ ... ▢ p_n → e_n`` | ✔ | - | Provided that all the expressions have the same type. Similar to TLC, the case expression is translated to series of IF-THEN-ELSE expressions.
``CASE p1→ e1 ▢ ... ▢ p_n → e_n ▢ OTHER → e`` | ✔ | - | See the comment above
``LET d1 == e1 ... d_n == e_n IN e`` | ✔ / ✖ | `0.7-dev-calls` | Provisionally, all usages of d1, ..., d_n are replaced with the expressions e1, ... e_n respectively.
multi-line /\ and \/ | ✔ | - | 

### The Action Operators

Construct  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``e'`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Provided that e is a variable
``[A]_e`` | ✖ | - | It does not matter for safety
``< A >_e`` | ✖ | - |
``ENABLED A`` | ✖ | - |	
``UNCHANGED <<e_1, ..., e_k>>`` | ✔ | - |	Always replaced with ``e_1' = e_1 /\ ... /\ e_k' = e_k``
``A ∙ B`` | ✖ | - |
	
### The Temporal Operators
	
The model checker assumes that the specification has the form Init /\ ▢[Next]_e. Given an invariant candidate Inv, the tool checks, whether Inv is violated by an execution whose length is bounded by the given argument.

Except the standard form Init /\ ▢[Next]_e, no temporal operators are supported.

## Standard modules

### Integers and Naturals

For the moment, the model checker does not differentiate between integers and naturals. They are all translated as integers in SMT.

**TODO: explicitly add the constraint x >= 0 for the naturals.**

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
+, -, *, <=, >=, <, > | ✔ | - | These operators are translated into integer arithmetic of the SMT solver. Linear integer arithmetic is preferred.
/, % | ✔ | - | Integer division and modulo
``a^b`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Provided a and b are constant expressions. 
``a..b`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Provided a and b are constant expressions. In general, use ``{x \in A..B : a <= x /\ x <= b}``, if you know constant bounds ``A`` and ``B`` on the variables ``a`` and ``b``. 
``Int``, ``Nat`` | ✔ / ✖ | - | Supported in ``\E x \in Nat: p`` and ``\E x \in Int: p``, if the expression is not located under ``\A`` and ``~``. We also support assignments like ``f' \in [S -> Int]`` and tests ``f \in [S -> Nat]`` 
÷ | ✖ | - | Real division, not supported

### Sequences

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``<<...>>``, ``Head``, ``Tail``, ``Len``, ``SubSeq`` | ✔ | - | Supported in `0.5-dev-lang`. The sequence constructor ``<<...>>`` needs a [type annotation](types-and-annotations.md).
``EXCEPT`` and ``\o`` | ✖ | `0.5-dev-lang` | these operators do not seem to be often used
``Seq(S)`` | ✖ | - | We need an upper bound on the length of the sequences.
``SelectSeq`` | ✖ | - | will not be supported in the near future

### FiniteSets

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``IsFinite`` | ✔ | - | Always returns true, as all the supported sets are finite
``Cardinality`` | ✔ | - | Try to avoid it, as Cardinality(S) produces ``O(n^2)`` constraints in SMT for cardinality `n`

### TLC

Operator  | Supported? | Milestone | Comment
------------------------|:------------------:|:---------------:|--------------
``f @@ a :> b`` | ✔ | - | Supported in `0.5-dev-lang`. Extends the function relation with the pair ``<<a, b>>``

### Reals

Not supported, not a priority




[cheat]: https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/summary.pdf
